
Fellow Board Members;

I am writing this letter to urge you to maintain the status quo regarding the upcoming proposal to lower the current price cap.  Unfortunately, despite the long debates that has led to the current price cap policy, Southern California Edison (SCE) has once again requested that the price caps be lowered.  Lowering the price cap would be a mistake because, this action:


Will further undermine the credibility of the ISO in the minds of market participants and the FERC;
Will jeopardize the long-term reliability of the electric industry in California;
Is unneeded because suitable tools are available to address the issues raised by SCE;
Is an inappropriate regulatory intervention in response to an abnormal weather condition (for which there is no regulatory fix);
Will inhibit full load participation in the California electric market at a time when load is just  beginning to take a more active role in the market;

One of the major components contributing to the system emergency that occurred two weeks ago was the underscheduling of load that was taking place.  I agree with the San Diego Gas & Electric letter dated June 23 where they state, “Specifically, we understand from the CAL ISO report that the major market issue on June 13, 14, and 15 was caused by the gross underscheduling of load by Scheduling Coordinators.”  Analysis of data from the last few weeks indicates that the day-ahead market is generally one of the lower-priced markets during times of high demand.  As reported at last week’s Board meeting, the high demand periods in mid-June were also times when underscheduling of load was significant.  On numerous occasions, the ISO staff has pointed out that chronic underscheduling of load presents operational reliability problems to the grid operator.  By letting thousands of MWs go into the real-time market SCE forced the ISO to purchase larger amounts of Replacement Reserves with this cost being passed on to SCE and other market participants.  

There are two reasons SCE might choose to underschedule load.  One is due to the price cap arbitrage between the PX and the ISO’s markets.  Under the current price caps the total maximum charge for real-time balancing is $1,500 (Maximum energy plus maximum congestion).  When the real-time market (including incs and decs) is capped at $750 and the forward market (day-ahead and day-of) market are capped at $2,500 the UDCs cannot rationally mitigate the congestion cost if they purchase energy in the forward market at more than $750. The second reason has to do with the current market structure utilizing the Market Clearing Price methodology.  As explained at last week’s Board meeting, the combination of the ISO’s $750 price cap and the PX’s market clearing price methodology provides an incentive for SCE to lower overall cost by buying only a portion of its load in the PX market.  This is a rational market behavior to save money given the market conditions, but a behavior that potentially jeopardizes grid reliability.   Notably, the solution to this perverse incentive is to raise, not lower the price caps to the same level as the PX.  

Irrespective of the money saved letting thousands of MWs of load ride to real time, this behavior causes significant operational problems to the ISO.  The cost of a grid wide outage far outweighs any savings derived by the short-term so-called strategic bidding by the load. 

Just the fact that we are discussing yet another spur-of-the-moment, piece-meal change to the market should be of great concern to all of us. Constant changes to the market have the effect of eroding the credibility of the California ISO and reducing the attractiveness of generation investments in the California market relative to other markets.  Over the past two and a half years we have made several significant changes to the design of the California market and we are still making significant changes.  We like to take pride in the fact the California is a pioneer in electric restructuring activities but after 29 tariff amendments, it appears that we are pioneers in “not getting it right.”  Our credibility is certainly in debate – at FERC, at other ISO’s, and within the industry in general. 

It has been stated by more than one of the companies in the generator class that while they understand the need for new electric generation in California, they are reluctant to invest in California because of price caps and constant rule changes.  Short-term price spikes occurred in the Mid-west in 1998 and 1999.  As a result, numerous new peaking generation plants have been sited and built in the last two years and are available to meet peak demand in 2000.  Price spikes in California also occurred in 1998.  The result was price caps.  Not only has no new generation been added in California, the number of applications at the CEC has not appreciably increased and less than 2,000 MW of additional capacity seems to be moving forward without delay.  When given the choice of investing in generation in California and investing in generation in other parts of the country, it is clear that more and more companies are choosing to invest in other parts of the country.  This pattern combined with California’s strong economy and load growth, mean that California can expect many more years of short supply of electricity.   If this trend continues, it will sooner, rather than later become a serious threat to reliability.  To ensure long-term reliability, the ISO should be doing everything it can to encourage the addition of new generation, participation of load in the market, and strengthening of the transmission system.  Price caps do not achieve any of these goals.

The true issue here is not the price cap but SCE’s continued collection of CTC and the effect that higher prices have on that collection.  Despite having been provided with tools to protect against price spikes, SCE appears to have nonetheless been caught short.  In place of careful attention to, and execution of, its business, SCE advocates more changes to the price cap.   At this time, I fail to see why SCE or other purchasers of electricity need lower price caps.  So far, SCE has only offered vague references to costs.  SCE has not provided a detailed analysis of those costs reflecting the relevant factors such as SCE’s QF generation (which is not materially affected by market prices) and its own generation (Nuclear, Hydro and Coal) that is netted out of its cost.  The burden of proof for damages that can only be remedied by changes to the price cap falls to SCE.  SCE has not met this burden.

Further, consider the tools that SCE has to avoid the impacts of price spikes.  First, SCE has FERC-approved and CPUC-approved ability to hedge a portion of their load (currently 2,200 MWs increasing to 5,200 MWs July 1st) to mitigate their price exposure by participating in the PX Block Forward Markets.  SCE has offered no evidence that they have taken full advantage of this program.  Perhaps most importantly on July 11th the PX will begin its daily block forward program.   This will virtually eliminate the incentive to underschedule in the day ahead market due to the fact that the block forward market is a matched bid market rather that a market clearing price market.  


If, SCE had fully participate in the Block Forward Market, used the Real-Time market as it was designed for (balancing only) instead of a major market for it’s underscheduled load, and utilized all of the other hedging tools available, I would argue that SCE’s problems were not of its own making.  Again, SCE has not made a case that its problems can only be resolved through changes to price caps. It is noteworthy that many parties in this market, including load, ESP’s, generators, and even some utilities, have already hedged their risk this summer based on the $750 cap. To change the price caps now will render those tools useless.   It seems ridiculous to punish those who used the hedging tools available for the benefit of those who did not.

Lowering the price caps will also increase the likelihood that energy will move out of state during critical periods.  In today’s forward markets for energy in Q3, Palo Verde is trading at a premium to SP15 even though Arizona exports power to California for most of the hours of the year.  The issues of what generators get paid when they do sell out of state and their schedule is cut due to California emergency (See my e-mail memo dated June 19) is still outstanding and with a lower cap becomes a more significant issue.

In today’s price cap debate, carried out with the usual religious fervor, it is important to remember that the event which provoked the current debate was a result of a 100-year weather event in the Bay Area accompanied by true shortage of supply and transmission transfer capability.  It is interesting to note that PG&E’s statements at the Board meeting indicated their main concern to be reliability and not market volatility or pricing.    Likewise, SDG&E, whose customers are actually exposed to the impacts of price volatility, did not support SCE’s position.  It should be noted that one of the ancillary effects of SCE’s proposal is to further shield load from the true cost of reliable power in California.  We cannot expect to have active load participation in the California electric markets if we refuse to let load pay the true costs of reliable electricity. 

In summary with the increased amounts of hedging capability to 5,200 MWs on July 1st and the commencement of the PX daily block forward market on July 11th SCE has all the tools it needs to protect their consumers.  Once again I urge you to resist political pressures and to do the right thing for the long term good of the California market and maintain the status quo regarding any lowering of the current cap. I do believe that for the longer term we need a safety net cap, which aligns real-time markets with the PX day-ahead cap and would eliminate the price cap arbitrage that I discussed earlier.   

Greg Blue
ISO Governing Board


