
Chief Operating Officer 
Reliant Energy Wholesale Group
P. O. Box 286
Houston, Texas 77001-0286
713/207-5670







   


D R A F T

June 26, 2000


The Honorable Gray Davis
Governor, State of California
State Capitol
Sacramento, CA  95814

Subject:  California Electricity System

Dear Governor Davis:

In recent weeks, California’s electricity system has been stressed to its limits by extreme weather conditions and other unexpected events. These conditions caused short-term electricity prices to rise sharply and required rotating service interruptions of customers in the San Francisco area. Overall, however, it appears that the markets functioned as designed during these periods and that the required load interruptions were well coordinated and managed, averting what could have been a serious crisis for California and surrounding western states.

I understand that you have called for an investigation of these events by the CPUC and the Electricity Oversight Board, and I want to assure you that Reliant Energy stands ready to assist you and the state agencies in this review. Through separate correspondence, we have provided CPUC President Lynch with information about the availability of our power plants during these periods and some of the extra-ordinary actions we took in this regard.  A copy of that letter is attached.          

As you may recall, Reliant Energy is an international energy services and delivery company. Our regulated utility company, Houston Power & Lighting, serves nearly 4 million electricity and natural gas customers in six states. In the past several years, Reliant Energy has invested over $500 million in generation assets that serve California consumers. 

While these recent events are serious and deserve thorough examination, they appear to be fundamentally related to the scarcity conditions that have developed in California and other western states. Intervening in the market precipitously, however, and lowering the existing price caps from $750 per megawatt-hour to $250/MWh, as some have proposed, would be a serious mistake. Far from protecting consumers, such intervention would:


Undermine developing forward markets;
Eliminate demand responsiveness incentives; 
Signal instability and uncertainty; and 
Threaten reliability by delaying or reducing needed investment in new generation plant.
California consumers would be better served if the proponents of market intervention directed their efforts toward utilizing available market mechanisms, such as forward contracts, rather than seeking to use lower price caps as a way of addressing utility stranded cost recovery concerns.   

Like many regions across the U.S., the phenomenal growth of California’s economy over the past eight years, and the lack of any new power plant construction in the past decade, have caused the state’s surplus electricity reserves to decline substantially and created the need for significant new investment in energy infrastructure. Reliant Energy agrees with the California ISO that a combination of new generation and transmission facilities, and a vibrant demand-side market, are needed to meet the state’s future electricity service demands. 

The current market, although certainly not perfect, is developing rapidly. Buyers and sellers are beginning to enter into long-term forward contracts that will ensure delivery of energy in a future period at a price certain.  For example, the California Power Exchange recently announced that participants in its’ forward markets have begun to execute hedging contracts for the summer of 2001. Moreover, demand responsiveness, which all experts agree is critical to the development of fully competitive electricity markets, is just now beginning to take hold, as customers recognize the economic incentives of curtailing usage during peak periods and in effect using their loads as a source of supply. Also, for the first time since the opening of the California market, price signals are making it more likely that the state will be able to attract the capital investment necessary to build new generation plant. 

But recent market conditions have also prompted calls for intervening in the market and lowering existing price caps, which are already among the lowest in any major market in the country. Imposing these restrictive price controls in the face of existing supply shortages would be ill-advised, however, as they would only exacerbate the shortage condition and further threaten long-term reliability. California’s need for new energy infrastructure has already arrived, as recent events have demonstrated, and intervening in the market now would create the risk that needed investments will not be forthcoming in the amounts required and in the time frame necessary to ensure a reliable electric system.  

Building new energy infrastructure is a costly and time-consuming process. In California, it takes 2-3 years to license and construct a new generation plant, and a major new transmission project can take as long as 5-7 years to complete. In other parts of the country where price caps do not exist or are less restrictive, price signals in one summer have resulted new supplies being constructed in time for the following summer.

I urge not to be persuaded by the claims of a persistent few that the market is broken and that the utilities are somehow unable to protect themselves or their customers from high prices. To the contrary, the utilities are highly sophisticated participants in these markets, leveraging and optimizing their positions as both large buyers and sellers of energy.  Bear in mind that while the hypothetical total market value of energy transactions can rise very significantly during extreme conditions, as occurred last week when gross transaction values in the California market reached $1.2 billion, the underlying market positions of buyers and sellers have likely reduced the true impact to substantially lower amounts. 

The utilities, for example, continue to own or control more than 40% of the state’s generation capacity, a larger ownership share than any other entity in the market, and as sellers they benefit when prices rise. The utilities also have been aggressive, and appropriately so, in developing new hedging products that allow them to manage price risk, and in gaining the regulatory approvals necessary to use these products to manage their energy costs.  In fact, a buyer who had purchased energy for June prior to the beginning of the second quarter would have locked in prices of only $38/MWh, only 5% of the price levels reached during the week of June 12.

It’s also important to note that most California consumers are still under the rate freeze (SDG&E customers excepted) enacted in January 1998, and as result any short-term price increases mainly impact the recovery of utility stranded costs. Thus, the real issue is not whether the markets are competitive, surely they are, but rather whether intervention in the market at this critical juncture is an appropriate response to utility concerns regarding stranded cost recovery.

In closing, let me say that although important refinements are still needed, California has successfully created one of the largest and most sophisticated competitive electricity markets in the world. Ultimately, though, the reforms will be judged by their ability to produce the capital investment needed to build new energy infrastructure. I urge you to support the continued development of California’s competitive electricity markets, and hope you will encourage the proponents of market intervention to identify alternative ways of addressing stranded cost recovery concerns.

I appreciate your consideration of these views and invite you to contact me if I can be of assistance in any way.   

       Respectfully and sincerely,




       Joe Bob Perkins

cc:  Loretta Lynch, President, California Public Utilities Commission
Michael Kahn, Chairman, Electricity Oversight Board
Members of the California ISO Governing Board







