The summarized list below is intended to be used to communicate some basic concepts to the those who are less educated on the intimate details of the market but are in a position to influence the political process.

The IOU’s should generally agree with the out of Px purchasing message. Underscheduling, gaming, market power are purposely left without mention. 

Without saying “I told you so” the implicit message is Bilateral Markets without price caps is the answer.



The Real Problems in California

Retail customers have no exposure to price spikes
Because of the price caps/discounts ensured at the time AB 1890 was passed, most California electric consumers behind IOU’s do not have exposure to the Px and ISO prices. The impact of high prices is being borne by the IOU’s.

IOU’s have no mechanisms to reduce exposure to price spikes
IOU’s have limited ability and motivation (because of reasonableness review) to manage price risk. The recent CPUC decision to allow more mechanisms for IOU’s to hedge price risk was quickly reversed by the Legislature. Long term, fixed price markets have continuously been available to customers in California including IOU’s – if they would have been able to enter into these transactions.

Recent Fixed Price Markets NP15/SP15:

    16 Hr Peak  24 hours
July    $170/$180  $120/$125 
Jul-Aug (Q3)   $155/$163  $111/$115
July 00 – June 01 (1 yr)  $63/$62   $52/$51

EES and other ESP’s have managed price risk effectively by purchasing power in the forward markets, thus limiting their exposure to price spikes.


The real issue is Scarcity - not broken markets and Price Caps
A mild summer and Northwest hydro production of 116% of normal in 1999 has hidden the fact that the WSCC is getting dangerously short of capacity margins. Deregulation uncertainty and extremely cumbersome permitting processes have delayed merchant power plant development. Economic growth in CA and throughout the WSCC has dramatically increased load. Both combined to create a tightening supply-demand situation. Changing price caps and introducing more regulatory uncertainty will delay development more rather than incent development with short periods of price spikes.


Solutions

The ISO Board Recognized several Solutions in their 6/28/00 Decision including:


load reduction programs should be implemented either through voluntary reduction for compensation or consumer responsibility for real time prices.
streamlined and accelerated infrastructure development – generation and transmission
further development of bilateral markets
allow the IOU’s to hedge their forward price risk in markets other than the CAPX Block Forward market


What will Make Price and Supply Problems Worse


Continued political reactions such as those related to ISO price caps and IOU’s purchasing mechanisms
Lowering price caps as other WSCC regions experience similar supply-demand tightening will only keep power normally imported to California in other regions of the WSCC and generation developers at bay, ultimately threatening reliability within California. 
Exercising control over in-California generation will only reduce market activity and create less liquid, more volatile market conditions within California.



