Proposed procedure and comments for Friday notifications


Thursday afternoon: 



I tell Steve Tropper that we (Gary H, Sheila and Hoyt) want to meet with him at breakfast on Friday at 7:30 AM NYC time.  




I have a meeting with Phil Bacon, Marcelo Parra, Joe Robertson (if available), Craig Young, TJ Pimpinelli, Al Pennisi, and Gloria Landi.  Topics: where will the FX guys sit the following week, where will the bullion traders sit next week, will they all interview the FX traders, will Gloria handle appts, can Gloria get boxes for them to pack up their stuff.




Someone notifies all the FX and Bullion employees that they need to be in the offices the following morning.




Hoyt contacts Per Sekse to see if he is willing to interview the redeployed candidates.  Hoyt contacts Marla Barnard to see if they want to talk to candidates.




Hoyt talks to Mike Cilento to see when Enron intranet is available.  Hoyt asks Mike if he can set up phones/computers in offices for the employees to use.




I have dinner with Kathy Huynh and bring her up to speed on what we are doing.



Friday 7:30 AM NYC time: Steve, Gary, Sheila and Hoyt have breakfast.  Gary tells Steve what we are doing with the business, and we ask Steve the best way to shut the business down.  We tailor our plan based on Steve’s input.  (Unfortunately, London is having their discussions with the FX employees at this time, so the decision on who to keep for the interim period in London will already be made, regardless of what Steve says.)


Friday 9AM NYC time: (This depends on what Steve recommends re shutting the business down.) Steve, Gary, Sheila, Gloria and Hoyt go to the FX offices and have a meeting with Ed Bracco, John Emslie, Russell Gilardi, Matt Murray, Billy Harold and Ed Franke.  Gary explains the decision and communicates the shutdown procedure to the people.  Hoyt’s speech:



Enron will keep them on payroll until September 18th to give them an opportunity to seek other employment in Enron, particularly in New York at 520 Madison or the old Enron office.  Enron will not guarantee relocation assistance if they choose to relocate for a different position in Enron.




Between August 25 and September 18, they will have use of limited facilities at 520 Madison Avenue.  This will include phone and internet access.  However, there will not be sufficient space for everyone; therefore we ask that they use the offices sparingly.  


They will not have access to the Rudolph Wolff building, so they will need to remove their property from the Wolff offices today.
Gloria Landi will be their primary point person in the 520 Madison Ave offices.  Gloria will coordinate appointments with the key individuals (Bacon, Parra, Robertson, Young, Pimpinelli, Pennisi) so that they can discuss positions with those individuals.  
Should Steve Tropper need them to shut down the business, they must be available while they are on payroll.
Prior to September 18th, they will receive a document from Enron detailing the separation agreement.  They will have time to review this document and seek legal counsel if they desire.  This legal document will reflect the terms and conditions of their agreement with MG.
If they have not found other employment as of September 18th, they will be terminated.  Payment of their severance pay will be contingent on execution of the documents provided to them.  The documents provided to them will define how the severance pay will be paid (lump sum, over time, etc).  In some cases, Enron may desire that the employees do not work while they are on the severance payments (if some of them are on monthly severance payments).  This would primarily be for the employees with longer-term arrangements.
Anyone that does not have any interest in seeking other opportunities in Enron is free to seek employment outside of Enron during the period from August 25 to September 18.  However, continued payment of salary until September 18 requires that the employees be available is needed for closing down the business.  Payment of the severance payment requires agreement to the legal documents.



Hoyt and Gloria then meet with each person individually, as necessary, to assure them that they are valuable people and that they should seriously look at opportunities in Enron.  Hoyt, Gloria and Sheila insure that they have packed their stuff and gotten out of there.




Friday after the meeting with the FX people (while Hoyt and Gloria are meeting with the individuals): Gary and Sheila (or some other witness) have a meeting with Bernie Penner and Jason Howlett, the bullion traders.  Gary explains the decision re bullion and informs Bernie and Jason that they now report to ????? and that their responsibilities have not changed.




Hoyt contacts Mo and tells him what we have done.


Questions:  
Do we bring folks like Phil Bacon or Marcello Parra to the meeting with us so that people know that they are on board with the redeployment effort.
Where do Penner and Howlett sit on Monday?
